Abstract Recent research indicates that our professions could improve in Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) cultural competency. As indicated by Turner, Wilson, and Shirah’s (2006) model of cultural competency, one can begin by increasing knowledge of transgender (TG) culture and improving sensitivity and attitudes foundational to serving these populations appropriately. This article sheds light on the factors influencing quality of life for many TG people, including voice. Readers are encouraged to include appropriate measures of voice-related quality of life in treatment outcomes and are provided with suggestions for developing LGBT cultural competency. Fifteen-year-old L.A. was an adolescent transitioning to full-time presentation as herself when she sought voice treatment. She was home-schooled during her transition because a teacher at her school bullied her. I found that disturbing as well as hard to believe because she looked and acted just like most 9th grade girls I have known. Yet she walked into the treatment room saying “I want to raise my pitch and sound more like a girl.” During our discussion of desired treatment outcomes, I asked her what famous person or television personality she wanted to sound like. I admit my own cultural biases at that time led me to expect her answer to be someone like Taylor Swift or Sarah Hyland’s character on Modern Family, “Haley Dunphy.” Then L.A. identified Kari Byron, the female host on the Myth Busters television show: a smart, creative, attractive woman on a science show—not to mention one with a pitch lower than L.A.’s! L.A. admitted that she hoped changing her voice would eliminate the teasing. She also acknowledged feeling powerless since the transition began and wanting to sound as cool, confident, and smart as Kari. She was expressing some of the common concerns of male-to-female (MTF) transgender (TG) speakers (e.g., safety, acceptance) but also describing her femininity as it fit with her developing identity. This exercise gave me valuable insight into how L.A.’s age, gender identity, and social context should guide our treatment plans. I would have been well within best practices to focus on raising her speaking frequency and training adolescent female intonation patterns, but I listened to her additional need to express her power and confidence now as a young woman. Using the cue “up, slow, and STRONG,” L.A. developed not only a fundamental frequency within female normative range, but also a louder voice and a slower rate of speech. Her new clear and strong voice conveyed a confident personality that would not be discouraged by bullies (Hancock & Helenius, 2012). I use this true story to demonstrate the importance of taking time to understand the client’s unique cultural perspective and how it can influence the direction of treatment. Cultural Competency This year, March and July issues Perspectives will include information about transgender (TG) culture and health care because cultural competence is a necessary compliment to clinical competence. Cultural competency is defined by the Centers for Disease Control and National Prevention Information Network (CDC) as the “ability to deliver services within the context of cultural beliefs, behaviors, and needs” (CDC, 2015). In L.A.’s case, it was important for me to understand that she wanted to raise her pitch primarily because she thought it would end the ridicule, and that she wanted to be able to express confidence and intelligence within a feminine register. She wanted to exist peacefully in a culture that did not entirely tolerate her, but she also valued her individuality and was learning to courageously express it. Take a moment to consider the cultures of your clients or students. Are you familiar with the cultures (an individual often identifies with several cultures) and how they may impact your clients’ performance or goals? Often we think of cultural competencies as they relate to racial or ethnic minorities; however, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender (LGBT) populations also have unique perspectives and concerns worth considering in clinical contexts. Our society generally assumes heterosexual relationships (i.e., heteronormative bias) and two genders; we also bear a history of unequal treatment of LGBT populations, particularly by the medical and legal fields (see Mayer et al., 2008 for an excellent history and discussion of barriers to health care). We tend to ask men about wives and women about husbands. We use forms with only two choices in the gender field. We assume a male-to-female transgender person wants to have a fundamental frequency above 180 Hz. Most often these assumptions are not problematic because they do capture the majority of the population. However, these dichotomies marginalize and discriminate against the LGBT minority. Turner, Wilson, and Shirah (2006) describe four stages of cultural competency: awareness, sensitivity, competency, and mastery. Awareness of a culture group’s history, terminology, and needs is necessary to develop sensitivity and attitudes of acceptance and cooperation. With foundations of accurate knowledge and appropriate attitudes, clinicians can demonstrate respect and consideration of cultural influences when delivering services. Eventually, clinicians may become knowledgeable and skilled enough in considering cultural influences that they can help others reach mastery level as well. As speech-language pathologists (SLPs), we are obligated to develop cultural competency for any areas in which we lack (American Speech-Language-Hearing Association [ASHA], Principles of Ethics I, Rule C and III, Rule B; ASHA, 2010). Exploring opportunities to gain competency in several cultural contexts should be intentionally included in the SLPs’ professional education. Several resources are provided by ASHA (2015) and by other Special Interest Groups (e.g., Masiongale, 2009; Steckly, 2009). Current Status Recent research indicates that our professions could improve in LGBT cultural competency. In a survey of 192 self-identified LGBT adults with a communication disorder, the majority perceived a heteronormative bias by the speech-language pathologist or audiologist (Kelly & Robinson, 2011). For example, when a clinician asks questions about a man’s “wife”, the clinician is assuming his spouse was female. Additionally, despite feeling that disclosure of their membership in LGBT community was important, many respondents (i.e., 58–96%, depending on disorder area) did not disclose their membership. The most frequently reported reason for this related to fear of bias or discrimination (Kelly & Robinson, 2011). Unfortunately this fear is commonandoftenderives from previous experiences. The exception in Kelly and Robinson’s (2011) survey was the group of three male-to-female (MTF) respondents seeking voice feminization treatment, who of course had to disclose their membership as well as other details about their transition. Transgender clients often query support groups, social networks, or the Internet to find SLPs experienced in voice feminization services, or at least clinicians who have demonstrated respect to other LGBT clients. Therefore, even clinicians skilled in voice treatment techniques must also demonstrate cultural competency. Clinicians’ insensitivity, often due to lack of knowledge or awareness of one’s own biases, can negatively impact the availability or quality of services for the TG populations. Considering the history—and continuation—of discrimination in health care services for LGBT populations, the perceptions of bias and fear of discrimination are understandable. There is some good news for our clients though. According to a survey of 279 student and practicing SLPs, we may not know a lot about LGBT culture but we are very willing to learn (Hancock & Haskin, in press). The respondents to the survey scored near 50% on multiple-choice questions of LGBT terminology and True/False questions regarding LGBT populations; however, self-ratings indicated overall strong positive feelings toward several LGBT populations and generally no moral hesitations in providing quality services to a client in the LGBT community (Hancock & Haskin, in press). For insight into the relationship between cultural and clinical competency, Hancock and Haskin (in press) also asked survey respondents to describe, if they knew, typical communication feminization therapy for MTF transgender people: Half (51%) of the respondents left the textbox blank. Answers from the other half of the respondents were generally consistent with those recommended in the World Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH) Standards of Care (WPATH, 2011) and research literature (Davies & Goldberg, 2006; Hancock & Garabedian, 2013; Oates & Dacakis, 1983), with the exception of only 19% of those responding including “resonance” as a targeted behavior. As clinicians become more aware and knowledgeable about the LGBT communities and the impact voice and communication treatment can have on the lives of our TG clients in particular, the demand for clinical education in this area will grow. Thus, cultural competency may be an impetus for clinical competency. Seek to Understand As indicated by Turner et al.’s (2006) model of cultural competency, one can begin by increasing knowledge of TG culture and improving sensitivity and attitudes foundational to serving these populations appropriately. Common terms and international standards presented in this and subsequent issues of Perspectives should provide knowledge adequate for reading further research literature, having conversations with related professionals, or serving clients without expressing heteronormative or binary gender bias. In addition, it is hoped that an awareness of the challenges facing the TG populations will cultivate a sensitivity and willingness to seek the clinical knowledge necessary to better serve them. Therefore, the remainder of this article will shed light on the factors influencing quality of life for many TG people and describe the positive impact successful voice treatment can have on the quality of life for TG speakers. As emphasized elsewhere in these issues of Perspectives, the subcultures of the TG community are vast and we cannot caution strongly enough against overgeneralization or stereotype. That said, there have been recent efforts to quantify the challenges facing TG and gender non-conforming populations, including challenges related to voice. Although gender discrimination is illegal, an estimated 15–26% of TG people have been fired because of their gender identity. Unemployment in the TG community is twice that of the U.S. population as a whole (Grant et al., 2011, Xavier & Simmons, 2000). In Washington, D.C., only 58% of the TG community is employed in paid positions (Xavier & Simmons, 2000). Partially due to these employment problems, only 40% of TG people have access to employer-based health care, and 19% of TG people have been homeless (Grant et al., 2011). The percentage of the TG population living below the poverty level (i.e., $10,000 per year or less) is 14%, double that of the general U.S. population, and the rate is higher among black and Latino/a TG people (Grant et al., 2011). Because of occupational, economic, and social discrimination, the quality of life for many TG individuals is miserably low. Transgender Voice and Communication Some people who are TG seek speech-language pathology services because their voice and communication is a major obstacle to living a “healthy, normal life” without unjust ridicule and discrimination. They need access to the educational, occupational, and health care opportunities that could change their lives. According to WPATH (2011), such opportunities are often denied when the individual presents in a gender-ambiguous or gender-incongruent persona. Thus, a common goal for male to female (MtF) speakers is to create a feminine-sounding voice in a healthy and sustainable way. Notably, some clients do not feel a strong need to achieve a voice that would be perceived by others as obviously feminine or masculine. Rather, their focus is on habituating a voice or communication that feels genuine and comfortable. Fortunately these two goals can often be achieved simultaneously, as speaker’s self-rating of voice femininity is strongly correlated with listener’s ratings (Owen & Hancock, 2010). Many SLPs who work with clients in voice feminization therapy have heard: “I’m fine until I open mouth, then a man’s voice comes out.” Such incongruence between visual and auditory presentations has social, occupational, and emotional implications. Degree of voice femininity perceived by the speaker and her listeners is correlated with voice-related quality of life for MtF speakers (Hancock, Krissinger, & Owen, 2011; McNeill, Wilson, Clark, & Deakin, 2008). These correlational studies confirm what our clients have told us for years: MtF speakers can expect a better quality of life after they sound more feminine. Generally, voice-related quality of life of MTF and Female-to-Male (FtM) speakers is comparable to patients with mild voice disorders, though some speakers are severely impacted by voice and communication concerns (Hancock, in review; Jacobson et al., 1997). Voice-related quality of life reported by MtF speakers is generally lower than that of FtM speakers (T’Sjoen et al., 2006). At this time, there is no reported investigation of voice impact in gender non-conforming populations. Measures to quantify voice-related quality of life for the MtF population have evolved in recent years. Standard measures such as the Voice Handicap Index (VHI; Jacobson et al., 1997) and Voice-Related Quality of Life (V-RQOL; Hogikyan & Sethuraman, 1999) do not include items of significant impact for an MtF speaker, such as how voice is perceived on the phone or femininity of laugh or cough. Although derived from the VHI, the Transgender Self-Evaluation Questionnaire (TSEQ; Davies, 2006) and its recently revised version the Transsexual Voice Questionnaire for Male-to-Female (TVQMtF; Dacakis, Davies, Oates, Douglas, & Johnston, 2013, available at http://www.shelaghdavies.com/questionnaire/questionnaire.html) are better able to capture the unique voice concerns of the MtF population. The TSEQ, originally developed by Shelagh Davies and published in an edited book (Adler, Hirsch, & Mordaunt, 2006), is widely used and accepted by professionals to index the handicap associated with voice for MtF speakers (i.e., has good face validity). It has very strong convergent validity and test-retest reliability with the VHI and V-RQOL questionnaires (Hancock, in review; Hancock, Owen, Seigfriedt, & Brundage, 2009). After qualitative and quantitative study, the TSEQ instrument was refined and renamed the Transsexual Voice Questionnaire for Male-to-Female Transsexuals (TVQMTF) and also has evidence of high internal consistency and excellent test-retest reliability (Dacakis et al., 2013). Self-ratings of quality of life, particularly as it is affected by voice and communication, can inform the SLP’s clinical decisions and document effectiveness of treatment. Furthermore, ASHA charges SLPs to “improve quality of life by reducing impairments of body functions and structures, activity limitations, participation restrictions, and barriers created by contextual factors” (2007, p. 4). Therefore, measures of voice-related quality of life should routinely be included with treatment outcomes and the instrument should be validated specifically for the TG population (Hancock, in review). Conclusion Acknowledging that TG individuals are particularly vulnerable in health care, it is apparent that there is a need to promote TG cultural competency within speech-language pathology. We can all do better. Reading this and subsequent issues of Perspectives is a great start. Perhaps you could also find some of the articles referenced or e-mail authors for information. Try an Internet search for “Transgender support” with your zip code and inquire about visiting TG groups. The National Center for Cultural Competence suggests cultural brokers to bridge cultural divides (www.culturalbroker.info). Check out the Human Rights Campaign website ( www.hrc.org/resources), which offers guides to advocacy and other issues relevant to the LGBT community, including information for LGBT parents and youth. Those of you at the “mastery” level of cultural competence have the most work to do. Share what you know: present at your state convention, include “Transgender voice and communication” on your website, urge your place of employment to use culturally sensitive language on forms (e.g., “gender” as a fill-in-the-blank instead of two choices). If you want to learn more, or want to teach others but do not have time to create materials, visit www.TheSafeZoneProject.com.Thiswebsite offers a free 2-hour curriculum for Safe Zone training programs, which are designed to educate and equip people to be culturally competent and supportive of LGBT individuals in the workplace, school, or even social settings. The recent interest and willingness to learn more about TG culture and clinical best practices is encouraging. Clearly the best practice guidelines provided in the WPATH Standards of Care and the upcoming companion document, as well as the growing treatment effectiveness research literature, is much needed and timely. Along with these, it is important to foster cultural competency in order to deliver services to TG individuals in an inclusive and respectful manner.